Hi and welcome to the lecture
on generalized linear models.
In this lecture we're going to
change gears quite a bit and
switch from linear additive
response models to
the much broader class of
generalized linear models.
These models take care of some instances
that linear models might struggle with.
But maybe at the expense
of some of the nicety and
the mathematical neatness that exists for
linear models.
Before I begin talking about generalized
linear models, I'd like to review a little
bit about linear models and maybe some
of their benefits and bad tough spots.
So to me, the linear model is the single
most useful applied statistical technique.
But again,
they're not without their limitations.
The assumption of additivity is one that
is kind of hard to apply when you have,
for example, binary data, it's weird to
think of binary data as being additive,
the error structure would have to
be kind of weird in that case.
In addition if your data
is strictly positive,
then having additive Gaussian errors
presents a problem because that
allows for
positive mass on negative values.
Now that may not be a problem and I often
say that it's not a problem to have.
Strictly positive data where
the arrows look out seen and
there's just very low probability
down towards the negative values.
That's often okay.
But, on the other hand, if the normal
distribution is putting a lot positive
probability on negative values even
though you know your response has to be
positive then that's problematic for
your model.
On the other hand,
you might try transformation.
A common transformation
when your outcome has
to be strictly positive is to
take the natural log of it.
A natural log, in my mind,
is perhaps the most interpretable
transformation possible.
Putting that one to the side.
Lots of other transformations that
are available to try to make our data
more normal.
Such as for binomial data,
people often will take a so
called arc sine square
root transformation.
That often destroys a large
amount of interpretability
of our model coefficients,
which is a real problem.
The log transformation I would
say is in a class of its own, and
in many ways can make
the coefficients more interpretable.
So we'll discuss that in it separately.
There's another reason to perhaps
approach generalized linear models
rather than doing a transformation
of the outcome or to do
approximate things with a linear model
is just nice and pleasant to have.
A model on the scale in which the date
it was recorded without having
a transformation and that really honors
the known assumptions about the data.
So, if we have binary data, a model that
really honors the fact that the data is
binary and
really doesn't require us to transform it.
It has a lot of pleasantness to it and
it makes a lot of internal sense.
And then I mentioned
here on this last point,
the natural log transformation
which is probably the most common
transformation is applicable for
negative or zero values.
Now there's some fixes to that, but
then that then harms some of the nice
properties of that transformation, some of
the really nice interpretable properties.
So generalized linear models were from
a 1972 paper by Nelder and Wedderburn,
a kind of famous paper that a few are PhD
statistician you've for certain read.
A generalized linear model
has three components.
First of all, the distribution that
describes the randomness has to come
from a particular family of distributions
called an exponential family.
This is a large family of distributions
that includes things like the normal and
the binomial and the poisson.
So that's the random component right,
that's the exponential family
is the random component.
Then the systematic component is the so
called linear predictor.
That's the part that we're modeling.
And we've done this very much so
in linear models already.
The random component was the errors,
the systematic component was the linear.
Component with the co variance,
coefficients and
then we need some way to connected to and
the link function it
connects some important meaning
from the exponential family
distribution to the linear predictors so
there's three things we need.
We need the distribution.
Which is going to be an exponential
family for generalizing your model.
We need the systematic component which
think of this as the linear predictor,
think of this as the set of regression
code or regression variables and
coefficients and then we need
a link function that links it to.
Okay, so let's try an example.
And we'll go to our familiar
example which is linear models.
The subject that we've been covering
the entire class up to this point.
So, in this case we are assuming that
our Y is normal with the mean Mu and
this happens to be an exponential
family distribution and
then we're going to define the linear
predictor, this a to i, okay,
to be the collection of co variant axis,
times their coefficients, beta, okay?
And in this case,
our link function is just going to
be the identity link function.
It just says that the mu from the normal
distribution is exactly this collection,
this sum of co variants and coefficients.
And so this just leads to the same model
that we've been talking about along.
We could just write it again as Y,
Yi is equal to
the Mu component which is summation
xi beta plus the error component.
So, we've simply written out
the linear model in a separate way.
We've talked about.
The fact instead of saying,
the error is normally distributed we say,
the why is normally distributed, which is
a consequence of our other specification.
We specify a linear predictor
kind of separately.
Okay.
And then we just connect
the mean from the normal distribution
to the linear predictor.
And you might think this seems
like a crazy thing to do
when just righting it out as
an additive sum with additive errors.
Seems like such an easy thing to do but
as we move over to different settings like
the plus sign and the binomial setting
it'll be quite a bit more
apparent why we're doing this.
So let's take in my mind perhaps
the most useful variation
of generalized models logistic regression.
So in this setting we have data
that are zero one so binary.
And so it doesn't make a lot of sense to
assume it come from a normal distribution.
So the natural, the only distribution
available to us for coin flips for
zero one outcomes is a so
called Bernoulli distribution so we're
going to assume that our data, our outcome
Ys, follow a Bernoulli distribution,
where the probability of a head, or a so
called expected value of the y, is mu y.
Okay, so we're modeling our data
as if it's a bunch of coin flips.
Only the probability of a head
may switch from flip to flip,
and it's necessarily .5.
Okay, so the probability is given
by this parameter Mu sub i.
The linear predictor is still the same.
It's just the sum of the covariance
times the coefficients.
Now the link function in this case,
the most famous and most common one,
is the so called logistic link function,
or the log odds.
So in this case the way in which
we're going to get from the mean from
the probability of the head to the linear
predictor is to take the log of the odds.
So the odds are, the probability
over one minus the probability, so
in this case we have written
it is mu over one minus mu.
We're going to take
the natural logarithm of it.
So the logarithm,
what that basically means,
is that we're going to transform our mean,
our probability of getting ahead.
We're going to transform it, and
then on that transform scale is where
the co-variance and their coefficients,
the kind of standard part of our
linear model is going to appear.
So notice, we're transforming
the mean of the distribution.
We're not transforming the Ys themselves,
okay, right?
That's a big distinction and
that's the neat part of
generalization in your models.
What we're transform, we're assuming that
the coin has a probability the head,
if we're modeling our data, is coin.
That coin has a probability of getting a
head and that probability, if we transform
it in a specific way, then, it relates to
our co-variance and coefficients, okay?
So we can go backwards from the log odds
to get back to the mean itself, okay?
And so the inverse logic,
I guess I often call it the X pit,
though I don't know how standard that is.
Is e to the eta i over 1 plus e to the eta
i, and that gets you back to mu, okay?
So going forward, you take log of mu
over 1 minus mu, that gives us eta.
If we take e to the eta over 1 plus e
to the eta, that gets us back to mu.
And by the way,
1 minus mu, the probability of the tail,
is 1 over e to the eta.
So we could write out our likelihood
as the binomial likelihood
right there like this.
And I think you can see then,
it's through this likelihood, like we have
talked about in our stat inference class,
it's through that likelihood
that we're going to optimize,
we're going to maximize that likelihood
to obtain our parameter estimates.
[NOISE] Okay let's go through another
example Poisson regression or
I like to say Poisson regression.
I know I'm not pronouncing it correctly
but I like to say it that way.
So assume that Y is Poisson mu i
where the mu i is the expected value
of each of the Poisson random variables.
In this case the mu has
to be larger than zero.
So Poisson is extremely useful for
modelling count data, or that's really
what it is for, for modelling counts.
So if you have a bunch of positive
counts that are unbounded, right?
So not like binomial counts where they're
bounded by the number of coin flips
we take, Poisson counts are unbounded,
and so it's a very useful model.
Let's suppose you want to count the number
of people that show up at a bus stop,
you don't have an upper limit on that,
or sure, there is some upper limit, but
you don't really know what it is, so
you might want to model that as Poisson.
Our linear predictor is again,
the same as it was in every case,
it's just the sum of the co-variance
times their coefficients.
The link function in this
case is the log link.
The most common link function for
the Poisson case is the log, the log link.
And remember, we go from the mean,
mu, to the linear predictor, eta,
by taking the log of the mean.
Okay so again we're not logging the data,
we're logging the mean
from the distribution that
the data is assumed to come from.
And then remember the inverse of
the natural logarithm is e to that thing.
So we can go backwards from eta
back to mew by taking e to the eta.
So, by doing that we can just simply
write out what our likelihood is,
and again the way GLMs work,
is they obtain the parameter estimates
by maximizing the likelihood.
So, I give some technical facts here and
basically we're just saying that
the likelihood simplifies quite
a bit in all these cases because of the
particular link function that we've shown.
But I want to point out this
final point here which says that,
the maximum likelihood looks like sort of
an equation that we would want to solve,
not unlike least squares.
So think way back to our initial
lectures on least squares.
We found our estimates by
minimizing the sum of the squared
vertical distances between
the fitted line and the outcome.
Well if you wanted to opt to minimize that
function in a sort of automated way,
you might take a derivative, so
then that function will no longer be
squared, the two would come down.
And so you get to try to find
the root of that derivative,
you just get a linear equation.
Well this generalization in generalizing
your models by solving the likelihood,
trying to maximize the likelihood you get
a very similar equation that you want to
set equal to zero and solve that gives you
your estimate, and I give it right here.
And it's basically not very
similar to the linear model
case only there's a set of weights and
a variance in the denominator,
that doesn't go away like it
does in the least squares case.
So again this is not for this class,
it's just if you're interested in
some of the details of the fitting.
Basically the point of this slide
is to say that it's very similar
to what's going on in least squares,
just how we get to that point
is a little bit more circuitous.
For most people, in most settings, this is
all going to be very transparent to you.
You're going to mostly concern
yourself with the interpretation
of your generalizing of your model, you're
not going to concern yourself too much
with how the specifics of how it was fit.
There is an important point I'd like
to note about generalized linear models
especially for the some of the cases like
the Poisson case and the binomial case.
For the linear model, remember we have
this assumption of a constant variance.
However, for the Bernoulli case,
the variance of a coin flip is p*(1-p),
and in the notation we're
given here it's mu(1- mu).
But remember, our mu depends on i,
so what we're saying is,
the variance actually depends on
which observation you're looking at.
Unlike the linear model case where
the variance is constant across I.
Same thing in the Poisson case.
Variance of a Poisson is it's mean,
so in this case,
the Poisson has variance
that differs by I.
This is a modeling assumption
that you can check, right?
So if you have Poisson data,
you can, let's say you have several
Poisson observations at the same
level of co-variance so
the mean should be the same.
Then the variance of those should
be roughly equal to the mean.
If your data doesn't exhibit that,
then that's a problem.
So this is a highly consistent,
an important,
practical consideration in
generalized linear models,
is that the modeling assumptions
often put a restriction
on a relationship between the mean and
the variance, and
that relationship may not hold
in your specific data set, so.
What can you do?
Well there was a way to address this by
having a more flexible variance model
even though you lose some of the
assumptions of generalized linear models.
And these are all standard options and
are and so all you look at our so
called quasi blank options in the family,
in the distribution.
So we're going to go through lots of
examples, but the point is is that's, so
if you see an R that you see that you
can fit a model that's Poisson, with its
GLM function, but then you see there's
another option called quasi-Poisson.
The same thing with binomial.
You can see an option where
you'd fit binomial, but
then you see another option
where it's quasi-binomial.
What that's referring to is a slightly
more flexible variance model
in case your data doesn't adhere
to the GLM variant structure.
Okay?
And so these are all standard options in
every statistical language that fits GLMs,
also automatically will fit these quasi
versions of GLMs with a more flexible
variant structure, and I give, here I
actually give the equation that it's
trying to solve in order to get the
fancier more flexible variant structure.
So, just some odds and ends about the
fitting before we go through the specific
cases, we're going to do separately the
Poisson case and the Binomial case, we're
not going to go through a full treatment
of GLMs just Poisson and Binomiali.
But these equations have to be solved
iteratively, so unlike the linear
model where you can just do strict
linear algebra to find solutions,
GLMs actually have to be optimized which
means sometimes the program fails.
For example if you have a lot of zeros
in a binary regression or zeros and
ones, these things can happen.
But other than that,
then I think most of the analysis
should be pretty familiar to us.
If we want to get our predicted response,
we're just going to take our coefficients,
our estimated coefficients beta hat,
multiply them times our regressors, and
that we'll give us our
predictive response.
Now notice this is going to be on the
logent scale if you're doing, for example,
logistic regression, or the log scale
if you're doing Poisson regression, so
you'll have to convert it
back to the natural scale
if you want it to be on the same
scale as the original data.
So if you're modeling coin flips and
you get your regression coefficients and
out and
you come up with predicted response
those will be on the logent scale and
if you want them to be back on
the scale of the coin flip the zero or
one between zero or one you're going to
need to take an inversion logent.
And again we're going to go through a lot
of examples I just want to outline these
facts before we do the examples.
The coefficients are interpreted
very similarly to
the way that our coefficients were
interpreted in linear aggression.
They are the expected change in the, the
change in the expected response per unit
change in the regressors, holding
the other regressors constant, the only
difference is now, this interpretation is
done on the scale of the linear predictor.
So the binomial cases
on the scale of logent,
on the Poisson case it's on the scale
of the log mean, and so on.
So it's a slightly more complicated
interpretation, but again,
we are gaining the benefit of modeling
our dot data naturally on its own scale,
and we haven't had to
transform the outcome at all.
So the inference, we also lose the nice
collection of closed form,
normal inferences that you get.
We don't get t-distributions any more.
But largely, this is transparent.
There's a body of mathematics where
statisticians and mathematicians have
figured out what the right distributions
are to compare all the coefficients.
And from the output of your GLM too in
order to get things like p values and
all of those are going to be tested or
hypothesis tested the coefficients
are just going to be tested and
interpreted in the same way as in our
linear regression just the background
that's going on is a little bit harder.
One thing I would say though is all of
these results are based on asymptotics
which means that they
require larger sample sizes.
So if you have a GLM setting
with a very small sample size,
then it's possible that things like
your p values aren't really applicable.
And so many of the ideas can
be brought over from GLMs, so
this was just a whirlwind overview
of GLMs Now for the next two
lectures let's just dig in to the two
most important cases of binomial and
Bernoulli regression via logistic
regression and Poisson regression.
So we're going to do spend a lot of
time with those and then if you want
further material on GLMs there's some
more advanced classes that you can take.
Okay, well thank you for attending this
lecture and I look forward to seeing you
in the next one where we're going to cover
logistic regression for binary outcomes.